## About the Lab

This is a 10-week hands-on lab; we'll be learning how to use data to answer important and public-minded questions with an emphasis on justice and equity. You don't need to be an expert in statistics or R or visualization or coding coming in, the project will provide opportunities to develop these skills further. Good data-oriented work comes from the collaboration of people with diverse talents, perspectives, and  expertise. We need individuals interested in data wrangling and analysis, working in R,  and visualizing data effectively; but we also need people with an understanding or interest in child welfare, who can ask probing questions and think creatively; and members who can help teams work better and keep projects moving, and who can dig into a new substantive area to synthesize information and  communicate about our work effectively. That doesn't mean everyone won't be responsible for learning about and contributing to each step of the project, but you may find that at some points you are more of a learner and at other points you are more of a leader.

After the first few weeks, we'll begin working in smaller teams (of about 3) to complete assigned tasks for the fuller project. We'll need to quickly develop a better understanding of the child welfare system and processes. We'll need to understand the data we have, consider its provenance, and evaluate it's limitations. There will be no *right* answers, and we don't have pre-determined outcomes. So it will be very representative of real-life data science work - embrace the ambiguity!

## Expectations and Evaluations
Grades will depend on your learning and contribution to the project, which will be assessed by

### Individual Assignments (45%):

* R/Data exploration assignments (20%): In the first four weeks, individuals will complete assignments to become more comfortable using R and to learn about the data provided by the Virginia Department of Social Services. If you get stuck, you  can ask a colleague or me for help or troubleshooting, ideally through slack so that the learning can be shared. If you're in the position of helping a colleague, it's a great chance to deepen your own understanding by explaining ideas.
* Reading annotations and contributions (15%): Throughout the class, to facilitate understanding and discussion we’ll all contribute to collaborative annotations and commenting of the reading using Perusall. I will review these ahead of class to help organize our discussion. 
* Class contributions and participation (10%): Since we are working as a group to advance a real project for a real partner/client, attending class prepared to be fully engaged will help you get the most out of the experience and give the most to our joint effort.  Come prepared, do the reading, ask questions, chime in with ideas, help develop solutions, complete work you've been assigned. 

### Team Assignments (55%):
In the last half of the class, we'll begin working in groups to complete parts of the overall project. Once teams have been formed, I expect groups to meet each week between class to work together (via zoom, through chat in slack or a preferred platform). In addition, each team will meet with me at least once along the way. 

 * Team data assignments (20%): Each team will take on responsibility for a different research question, exploring the relevant parts of the data set, setting up the data to address those questions, creating visuals and comparisons, possibly implementing models and results. Each group will report on their progress each week, sometimes to the class, sometimes through documents submitted on slack. Based on that progress, we'll determine the next steps that should be completed for the following class. Though I have something of an outline in my head of where I imagine we'll be from week to week, applied research and data analysis often does not conform to planned timelines. In part, that's what makes it exciting, but I know that can be uncomfortable for some, so I want to be upfront that the project will require some flexibility on all our parts.
 * Peer team feedback (10%): Once we begin submitting team assignments, each group will provide feedback to another group's contribution from the prior week, sharing ideas, making suggestions, identifying elements that need more clarification or thought, and proposing additional steps. 
 * Team literature reviews (10%): For three weeks, each team will dive further into the research literature to contribute to the collection of annotated research we've been building. One week, the team will select a previously reviewed article, re-reading and creating an additional summary; one week, I'll assign each team a new (not yet reviewed) article; and one week, the team will generate their own suggested research article.
 * Draft and Final Status Report (15%): Each group will be responsible for completing a status report on their work, outlining the key questions they've been addressing, how the literature intersects with the questions, communicating their process and progress towards addressing the resesarch question, highlighiting concerns and caveats, and outlining additional steps for the final report. 
